
BACHELOR THESIS PROJECT -I
Project – I (AG47007) report submitted to
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
In partial fulfilment for the award of the degree of
Bachelor of Technology in
Agricultural and Food Engineering
BY
Tippagudisi Deepika Sravya
19AG36010
UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF
Professor Anoop Ayyappan
Department of Chemistry
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
November 15, 2022
0

DECLARATION
I certify that
(a) The work contained in this report has been done by me under the guidance of
my supervisor.
(b) The work has not been submitted to any other Institute for any degree or
diploma.
(c) I have conformed to the norms and guidelines given in the Ethical Code of
Conduct of the Institute.
(d) Whenever I have used materials (data, theoretical analysis, figures, and text)
from other sources, I have given due credit to them by citing them in the text of the
thesis and giving their details in the references. Further, I have taken permission from
the copyright owners of the sources, whenever necessary.
Date: November 06, 2022 Name: Tippagudisi Deepika Sravya
Place: Kharagpur Roll Number: 19AG36010
1

DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR
KHARAGPUR – 721302, INDIA
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the project report submitted by Tippagudisi Deepika Sravya (Roll No.
19AG36010) to the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur towards the partial fulfilment of
requirements for the award of the degree of Bachelor of Technology in Agricultural and Food
Engineering is a record of bonade work carried out by him under my supervision and guidance
during Autumn Semester, 2022-23.
Professor Anoop Ayyappan
Date: November 15, 2022 Department of Chemistry
Place: Kharagpur Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Kharagpur – 721302, India
2

Preface
This Bachelor Thesis Project is based on Data aggregation and analysis for Web-based
exploration of hydrocarbons in prebiotic chemistry. It is basically an application of
computational methods on chemical compounds, usually referred to as computational
chemistry. This thesis has been submitted for evaluation at the department of chemistry, Indian
Institute of Technology Kharagpur. This thesis was done under the supervision of professor
Anoop Ayyappan and with the guidance of a Research Scholar, Sandip Giri from the
department of chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur.
I would like to thank my supervisor professor Anoop Ayyappan for providing this
opportunity to work in the field of computational chemistry. I also want to thank Sandip Giri
for his constant guidance throughout the project and Katravath Vasu for working on the
development of the web server.
3

Table of Contents
1. Title page……………………………………………………………. 0
2. Declaration………………………………………………………...... 1
3. Certificate of Supervision……………………………………………2
4. Preface…………………………………………………………......... 3
5. Table of Contents…………………………………………………….4
6. Chapters
i. Introduction…………………………………………………... 5
ii. Abstract………………………………………………………. 6
iii. Data CRUD……………………………………………………7
iv. Implementation………………………………………………...13
iv. Conclusion……………………………………………………. 16
v. References……………………………………………………17
List of Figures:
1. Illustration of the collection of data from various sources
2. Illustration of Data Cycle
3. Illustration of the block of code for the file conversion
4. Example of SMILES representation
5. Block of code for extraction of hydrocarbons
6. Block of code for conversion of smile representation to the molecular formula
7. Block of code for calculating molecular weight
8. PubChem Molecular weight Histogram
9. QM9 Molecular weight Histogram
10. PyAR Molecular weight Histogram
11. Block of code for log file extraction
12. Block of code for out file extraction
13. Illustration of Web and Database model
14. Workflow of the web server
4

Data aggregation and Analysis for
Web-Based Exploration of Hydrocarbons
in Prebiotic Chemistry
Introduction
The design, discovery, and fabrication of new chemical compounds are essential to solve
various issues such as environmental pollution, global warming, and CO2 to O2 conversion.
Building basic knowledge of these chemical compounds has become an important task to tackle
these issues. Database systems are constructed to store and reuse the collected data. To gather
molecular properties and construct chemical databases, experimental measurements are often
employed. However, the experimental approaches are sometimes very expensive. In some cases,
it is difficult or impossible to measure the molecular properties of some compounds. Therefore,
even if these large-scale molecular databases are highly necessary, it is not easy to construct
them experimentally.
Large-scale databases have many useful applications, such as in virtual screening or as
expert systems to find molecules with desired properties or perform fast molecular property
estimations. On the contrary, large data sets play essential roles in the machine- and
deep-learning methods. In chemistry, and data-driven studies the size of the dataset is a critical
factor. Being the most significant aspect in the development of the website, the dataset should
be accurate. The display of the information solely depends upon the availability of the data.
Hence, it is important to gather a large amount of information on molecules. As the thesis
project is exclusively for hydrocarbons, it is important to gather all the information related to
hydrocarbons and help the user to retrieve the information. Therefore, this thesis project aims to
assemble the available data in a single folder and compare them with the dataset available on
the internet.
5

Abstract
As the data is building up day by day, we need to keep a record of the data which can be
helpful for analytics and evaluation. Now we don’t have data in gigabytes or terabytes but in
Zetta, bytes and petabytes and this data can not be handled with day-to-day software such as
Excel or Matlab. Therefore in this report, we will be dealing with large data sets with the
high-level programming language ’Python’. The main goal of this project is to aggregate and
analyze the data on hydrocarbons collected from the different data sources available on the
internet.
Stimulated by many web-based database models in both industry and academic sectors,
we designed a web app to enable the community a browsing experience from a search bar. A
general view of web server workflow is given here. It consists of three python files, one
template folder, a CSV file and some binary files. Apart from the standard library, this model is
based on four other python libraries. These are, (1) SQLite3, (2) flask, (3) request and (4)
RDKit. You can easily install all of them using pip or conda package manager. SQLite3 is a
python based lite module of MySQL. It basically converts a CSV file to table format. The
aggregation of the data is required to store it in a database. The data aggregation and analysis
can be automated by building some basic algorithms using the python packages available. The
data aggregation of hydrocarbons has been done from various sources and aggregated in CSV
files which can be installed in the database later.
Figure 1: Illustration of the collection of data from various sources
6

The data aggregation and analysis will help us to derive valuable insights and get a deep
knowledge of the dataset. The data cycle helps us in understanding it more clearly.
Figure 2: Illustration of Data Cycle
DATA CRUD:
The traditional spreadsheet cannot handle a query from multiple rows, but a SQL-based query
search can overcome this issue. Also, one can use many CSV files with a common column in a table
with a unique ID. To develop the database required for web-based exploration, data aggregation with
some preprocessing techniques like data cleaning, and removal of unrelated data has to be done. The
7

first step of data aggregation is extraction and generating the data. The extraction has been done from
two sources. The sources are namely,
1. PubChem
2. QM9.csv
3. PyAR
QM9.csv file is a direct CSV file which can be integrated with other data which is
already extracted from the qm9 website by following the preprocessing techniques. Whereas,
Pubchem is a web application where the dataset is available as it is the world’s largest collection
of freely accessible chemical information. The dataset from PubChem is in the format of dat
files i.e., file_name.dat which is then converted into a CSV file using a python programming
language. The block of code to convert the .dat file to a .csv file is shown below.
Figure 3: Illustration of the block of code for the file conversion
PyAR
PyAR stands for "Python program for aggregation and reaction", It's an Automated
prediction of unknown reactions between two reactants (A+B) and prediction of the geometries
of aggregates, atomic clusters etc. also an Automated search for reactions for bonds forming
between two atoms in two different molecules. This will generate a molecular aggregate/cluster
of size up to 10 with an XTB package using 8 trial orientations. The A.xyz is a standard
cartesian coordinate file.
The idea and the initial work started with Dr. Mark P. Waller at the University of
Muenster in 2011. Mark is currently at pending.ai. Later Dr. Surajit Nandi as a PhD student in
AnoopLab made immense contributions. Another major help came from a Masters project
student, Deebankur Bhattacharyya
8

The extraction of HydroCarbons is done from this automated prediction PyAR in Zip file
format with multiple folders and each folder has multiple CSV, log and out files with significant
SMILES
What are SMILES?
SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) is a chemical notation that
allows a user to represent a chemical structure in a way that can be used by the computer.
SMILES is an easily learned and flexible notation. The SMILES notation requires that you learn
a handful of rules.
Figure 4: Example of SMILES representation
SMILES was developed through funding from the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Mid-Continent Ecology Division-Duluth, (MED-Duluth) Duluth, MN to the Medicinal
Chemistry Project at Pomona College, Claremont, CA and the Computer Sciences Corporation,
Duluth, MN. Several publications discuss SMILES in more detail, including Anderson et al.
1987, Weininger 1988, Weininger et al. 1989, and Hunter et al., 1987.
HydroCarbon Extraction
Hydrocarbons are compounds comprised exclusively of carbon and hydrogen and they are
by far the dominant components of crude oil, processed petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline,
diesel, kerosene, fuel oil, and lubricating oil), coal tar, creosote, dyestuff, and pyrolysis waste
products.
9
TABLE: [['What are SMILES?'], ['SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) is a chemical notation that'], ['allows a user to represent a chemical structure in a way that can be used by the computer.'], ['SMILES is an easily learned and flexible notation. The SMILES notation requires that you learn'], ['a handful of rules.'], ['']]

TABLE: [['SMILES was developed through funding from the U.S. Environmental Protection'], ['Agency, Mid-Continent Ecology Division-Duluth, (MED-Duluth) Duluth, MN to the Medicinal'], ['Chemistry Project at Pomona College, Claremont, CA and the Computer Sciences Corporation,'], ['Duluth, MN. Several publications discuss SMILES in more detail, including Anderson et al.'], ['1987, Weininger 1988, Weininger et al. 1989, and Hunter et al., 1987.']]


The extracted PubChem.CSV and QM9.CSV are a combination of files with multiple
elements with multiple molecular forms. A Web-Based Exploration of Hydrocarbons in Prebiotic
Chemistry needs data on molecules in the form of Hydrocarbons preferably from PyAR. For
comparison, Have to extract Hydrocarbons from PubChem.csv and QM9.csv which is done for
further processing.
After the conversion of data has been done from the PubChem data file to the CSV file,
It is easier to analyse the data through CSV files also referred to as comma-separated values.
Now, extract the compounds exclusively consisting of hydrogen and carbons from the CSV file.
The block of code to extract the data is shown below.
Figure 5: Block of code for extraction of hydrocarbons
By using the RDKit module, I have converted the smile representation to the molecular
formula for the calculation of molecular weight. Each molecular smile representation has been
converted to the molecular formula by using the “MOLFROMSMILES” method available in the
RDKit module.
10

Figure 6: Block of code for conversion of smile representation to the molecular formula
Now, the calculation of molecular weight is done using the below described algorithm .
Figure 7: Block of code for calculating molecular weight
Using molecular weights from the PubChem Hydrocarbon csv, QM9 Hydrocarbon csv,
and PyAR csv files, A plotted histogram graph lets us know how many molecules are in each
file.
11

Figure 8: PubChem Molecular weight Histogram
Figure 9: QM9 Molecular weight Histogram
12

Figure 10: PyAR Molecular weight Histogram
Implementation
A Web-Based Exploration of Hydrocarbons in Prebiotic Chemistry needs the data, which
we take from PyAR dataset. Is PyAR data good enough? While comparing, PyAR CSV file had
less data than QM9 where the remaining data was in .out file and .log file format for each and
every SMILES. Using the algorithm described below, I extracted data like Energy, Dipole
moment, Rotational constants(A, B, C), Final single point energy, Total Enthalpy, Entropy and
Gibbs free energy from the .out and.log files for all SMILES and combined it into a single
merged CSV file.
13

Figure 11: Block of code for log file extraction
Figure 12: Block of code for out file extraction
14

Since the aggregation of data has been done, this data merged as CSV files can be
processed into a database software like MySQL, a relational database management system using
CRUD operations mentioned in the picture shown below. This CRUD operation helps in
manipulating and analysing the data. After the creation of the database, it can be linked to the
web server for retrieval of the information from the user end.
Figure 13: Illustration of Web and Database model
The below picture describes the workflow of the web server where the web server uses the
merged CSV files processed into the database using SQL programming language.
Figure 14: Workflow of the web server
15

Conclusion
This thesis project aims to aggregate the data from various sources and analyse it. As
described above in this report the data collected from various sources are now merged into a
single file. The information present in PyAR dataset is now updated with new information like
molecular weight, Energy, Dipole moment, Rotational constants(A, B, C), Final single point
energy, Total Enthalpy, Entropy and Gibbs free energy. This dataset now can be used for the
development of the web server and processed into a database which is useful for the retrieval of
information. The exploration of hydrocarbons is a part of chemical space. This model of
merging the files can be used with other combinations of heavy atoms to explore more complex
molecules. These hydrocarbon data will improve the quality of the existing dataset to build a
robust ML model in order to find unknown molecular information. If the dataset is accurate, it
becomes easier to build the algorithms and analyse the information. The aggregation of data,
manipulation of data and analysing gives us valuable insights. These insights can be used to
update the wrong information and deliver accurate values to the users. A good dataset is always
without any wrong information, wrong data, empty cells, or wrong format of data.
Future Work:
Although this thesis project is completed, there are many improvements that could be
made. The main issue is to make the dataset more accurate by comparing it with various
sources available and there is a need to add a lot of information to the dataset for the vast
exploration. There is also a need to integrate other datasets consisting of various information
available. After successful changes are made to the dataset, it can be linked to the database and
the web server which can be made accessible to the users over the internet. The web server
needs to be maintained and updated with new datasets or information from time to time.
16

References
(1) Coley, C. W. Defining and exploring chemical spaces. Trends in Chemistry 2021, 3,
133–145.
(2) Fink, T.; Bruggesser, H.; Reymond, J.-L. Virtual exploration of the small-molecule
chemical universe below 160 daltons. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2005,
44, 1504–1508.
(3) Fink, T.; Reymond, J.-L. Virtual exploration of the chemical universe up to 11 atoms
of C, N, O, F: assembly of 26.4 million structures (110.9 million stereoisomers) and
analysis for new ring systems, stereochemistry, physicochemical properties, compound
classes, and drug discovery. Journal of chemical information and modeling 2007, 47,
342–353.
(4) Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. 970 million druglike small molecules for virtual screening
in the chemical universe database GDB-13. Journal of the American Chemical Society
2009, 131, 8732–8733.
(5) Ruddigkeit, L.; Van Deursen, R.; Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. Enumeration of 166
billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database GDB-17. Journal of
chemical information and modeling 2012, 52, 2864–2875.
(14) Lepeshkin, S. V.; Baturin, V. S.; Naumova, A. S.; Oganov, A. R. “Magic” Molecules and
a New Look at Chemical Diversity of Hydrocarbons. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
Letters 2022, 13, 7600–7606.
(6) Rzepa, H. Teaching FAIR in Computational Chemistry: Managing and publishing data
using the twin tools of Compute Portals and Repositories. 2022,
(7) Reymond, J.-L. The chemical space project. Accounts of Chemical Research 2015, 48,
722–730.
(8) Reymond, J.-L.; Awale, M. Exploring chemical space for drug discovery using the chem-
ical universe database. ACS chemical neuroscience 2012, 3, 649–657.
(9) Dobson, C. M., et al. Chemical space and biology. Nature 2004, 432, 824–828.
(10) Reymond, J.-L.; Van Deursen, R.; Blum, L. C.; Ruddigkeit, L. Chemical space as a
source for new drugs. MedChemComm 2010, 1, 30–38.
(11) Von Lilienfeld, O. A. First principles view on chemical compound space: Gaining rigor-
ous atomistic control of molecular properties. International Journal of Quantum Chem-
istry 2013, 113, 1676–1689.
17
TABLE: [['133–145.'], ['(2) Fink, T.; Bruggesser, H.; Reymond, J.-L. Virtual exploration of the small-molecule'], ['chemical universe below 160 daltons. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2005,'], ['44, 1504–1508.'], ['(3) Fink, T.; Reymond, J.-L. Virtual exploration of the chemical universe up to 11 atoms'], ['of C, N, O, F: assembly of 26.4 million structures (110.9 million stereoisomers) and'], ['analysis for new ring systems, stereochemistry, physicochemical properties, compound'], ['classes, and drug discovery. Journal of chemical information and modeling 2007, 47,'], ['342–353.'], ['(4) Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. 970 million druglike small molecules for virtual screening'], ['in the chemical universe database GDB-13. Journal of the American Chemical Society'], ['2009, 131, 8732–8733.'], ['(5) Ruddigkeit, L.; Van Deursen, R.; Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. Enumeration of 166'], ['billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database GDB-17. Journal of'], ['chemical information and modeling 2012, 52, 2864–2875.'], ['(14) Lepeshkin, S. V.; Baturin, V. S.; Naumova, A. S.; Oganov, A. R. “Magic” Molecules and'], ['a New Look at Chemical Diversity of Hydrocarbons. The Journal of Physical Chemistry'], ['Letters 2022, 13, 7600–7606.'], ['(6) Rzepa, H. Teaching FAIR in Computational Chemistry: Managing and publishing data'], ['using the twin tools of Compute Portals and Repositories. 2022,'], ['(7) Reymond, J.-L. The chemical space project. Accounts of Chemical Research 2015, 48,'], ['722–730.'], ['(8) Reymond, J.-L.; Awale, M. Exploring chemical space for drug discovery using the chem-'], ['ical universe database. ACS chemical neuroscience 2012, 3, 649–657.'], ['(9) Dobson, C. M., et al. Chemical space and biology. Nature 2004, 432, 824–828.'], ['(10) Reymond, J.-L.; Van Deursen, R.; Blum, L. C.; Ruddigkeit, L. Chemical space as a'], ['source for new drugs. MedChemComm 2010, 1, 30–38.'], ['(11) Von Lilienfeld, O. A. First principles view on chemical compound space: Gaining rigor-'], ['ous atomistic control of molecular properties. International Journal of Quantum Chem-'], ['istry 2013, 113, 1676–1689.'], [''], ['']]

